Welcome, friends. Welcome. Thank you, as always. Thank you so much, really. It really is such
a special opportunity for us to get together, study, contemplate, and meditate on practice
and embody the Buddha Dharma. Such a sacred, special, very rare opportunity. So thanks for
joining in, connecting in, turning that bright, shining wisdom, rainbow compassion, light energy,
turning it on within yourself to really connect with all beings in an uplifting, mutually
beneficial
way. So thank you so much. As we usually do, we'll have these three motivations, three
ways to kind of refresh in that kind of naturalness in ourselves. We're going to like turn our
minds toward the Dharma, and those three ways are renunciation, bodhichitta, and pure perception.
So renunciation, this joy and appreciation, this deep gratitude, so these 18 endowments
we have. And so we can just really take a deep breath, feel our body, look around, look at
all the beautiful things that we get to enjoy with these sense doors, sense organs that
are working well, and then the sounds happen, and the colors happen, and the smells happen,
and we're here. We have this life. We have these moments where we can generate virtue.
That's such a rare special opportunity. And so, wow, it's really kind of extraordinary.
And so let's do that together now. We'll generate a very virtuous state of mind, this bodhichitta,
awakened heart mind of enlightenment. Just shine that on, that naturalness, that this
very moment, this time together, we're really genuinely wishing, like aspiring, that this
becomes a root condition that's just perfectly aligned with all beings everywhere, ourselves
included. And it becomes just this, in every way, lovely situation for beings that can't
even help but have love and compassion and wisdom blossom in their hearts and mind. Like
made this time, this time together, this reflection and this practice, may this become that
condition
for all beings to just wake up to their own inherent goodness.
And then thirdly, there is this inherent goodness. We have it, each of us. We've always had it.
We'll always have it, even if we don't see it, and we get kind of lost in the maze of
all of our kind of preoccupations and worries and doubts and fears and obsessions and all
the things. We still have this goodness. It's a stainless, continuous, true nature, this
Buddha nature that we have, tatagatagarbha. And so we kind of just confidently, courageously
like kind of shine that on and be enlightened awareness, be our naturalness. So with these
three qualities of exceptional boundless gratitude and joy, this love and appreciation for all
beings with a confident responsibility to free them from suffering and the causes of
suffering, as well as seeing their goodness nature, there's no real reason to have to
free anyone from anything. It's all already pure and enlightened and awakened. So we bring
all these three together as an active living experience right now.
Cool. So here we have these lineage teachings. We're connecting directly to the teachings
of the Buddha and Guru Padmasambhava and this stainless mountain range of lineage masters
all the way to our present living teachers. There's so many great realized beings around
and they've given us instructions on how to wake up and fully embody this Buddha nature,
to like be an ongoing bodhicitta all the time. They've given us this guidance, these instructions.
We have that available right now. And that's all that we're going to be reflecting on now
is this kind of living lineage of instructions of kind of advice that they've given. And
so specifically, the topic for this brief time together is, it's called something like
imaginative play beyond the eight worldly concerns. So imaginative play beyond the eight
worldly concerns. So that's this brief kind of theme we have for today or right now. And
it's kind of somewhat a free form, but it's also free form within these lineage frameworks.
So we have like all these lineage teachings and there's just a very tiny sampling here.
But the general idea that I was kind of thinking of is like kind of this natural capacity we
have to imaginatively creatively kind of engage our experience, this imaginative capacity,
this creative impulse. It's what an amazing thing that each of us has. And at the same
time in the Buddhist context, this functions best or this is most natural when it's not
self obsessed, when it's not held within kind of a framework of look at my art, look at
my offering. Basically look at me or you know, in one way you could say more like psychologically
like love me. Here's this awesome thing. Isn't it awesome? Won't you love me? I mean, isn't
that kind of we're always looking for this acknowledgement that I'm here too. I'm really
so great, right? So that's kind of like the little bit of the game we've been playing
kind of that we're kind of like automatically like making everyone play our game all the
time. And so the question is, can, how do we play this? How do we kind of engage this
creative impulse we have this extraordinary capacity to really vibrantly engage in an
elegant graceful spontaneous way? How do we do that in a Dharma way in a way where it's
not all about me. It's actually about all of us and it's about all beings and it's about
all manifest and unmanifest reality. So what is that in a Dharma context? How can we be
artistic but not self obsessed or not so self important or not so self centered or so egotistical
or so kind of disproportionately emphasizing me and my art and my new novel thing? So how
can we novelty creatively like engage? And is that possible to be natural and creative
and spontaneous and have it not be a self centered thing? Because my understanding of
Buddhism which is very tiny is that that's what Tantra is all about. Talk about imaginative
creative display where it's not centered on me at all. And so what we'll do here is kind
of in some ways unpack like how that's actually what visualization and dissolution stage practices
are. That's what we're doing. We're creatively emanating this entire universe of spontaneous
artistic kind of unfolding dynamic display and then we're dissolving it like it's allowing
it to self dissolve every time. So I think that's actually what in Buddhism Tantra Mahayana
is all about. And so we'll kind of build this up and try to get that and see if that's actually
true. So we'll kind of explore this a little bit. And so in terms of the title imaginative
play beyond the eight worldly concerns. So what are these eight worldly concerns? What
is the eight worldly concerns? Going right to inborn realization. This is R. Mckimpo
Samoan Dhonya Rinpoche's commentary on His Holiness D. R. Rinpoche's Mountain Retreat instructions.
On Realization. And in this book on page 36, Kimpo Samoan Rinpoche says, it's only as D.
R. Rinpoche counsels us to give up the eight worldly concerns. The eight worldly concerns
can be divided into two groups. The four that we want and the four that we want to avoid.
The four that we want are gain, pleasure or happiness, fame or high status, praise or
sweet words. And the four that we want to avoid are loss, pain and suffering, obscurity,
or notoriety, and then blame or harsh words. So these eight worldly concerns are also called
the eight worldly dharmas or the eight practices of samsara. The great master Longchampa said
that whoever is preoccupied by them is like a sick person in bed. No matter how often
he or she changes position, it is impossible to find comfort. As long as our minds are
captivated by thoughts and emotions, it's difficult not to engage in the eight worldly
concerns. We're trying to free our minds completely, but this takes time. So what should we do
until then? We should strive for less attachment. One way to accomplish this is to see all
phenomena
as dreams, illusion, or magic. Another way is to remember impermanence. What we want
is impermanent. What we want, what we get is impermanent and we ourselves are impermanent.
When death comes, everything we have and know, including our self identities, must be abandoned.
If we truly accept this, we will stop wanting so much and so intently. We will better value
what we have and what we are. Our empathy will grow because we'll know that all beings
are subject to impermanence and death, just as we are. Our self-importance will diminish
because we realize that death can come at any time and we have no control over it. Overall,
our lives will be more peaceful and productive. In addition to contemplating impermanence
and death, we should try to remember that even if we successfully navigate our way around
the eight worldly concerns, if we have not attained any spiritual stability, we will not
secure happiness. As Holiness writes date, worldly dharmas can be condensed into hope
and fear, which means attachment and aversion. Hope and attachment refer to what we want.
Fear and aversion refer to what we do not want. What we want and do not want are manifestations
of our minds. Our minds are infinite and pure. Whenever possible, we should tune into this.
So here, Rinpoche, Campbell, San Antonio, Rinpoche has laid out some very pithy advice on what
the eight worldly concerns are, how to work with them or kind of actually kind of open
our mind in a way that's not so oriented around these eight worldly concerns, and then why
we should do that because our mind is actually pure and perfect already. So these eight worldly
concerns are essentially hope and fear, and they all orient around a sense of me. In Buddhism,
it's called ego clinging or self grasping. Me, what do I want? What do I want to avoid?
And so here they are. We've heard them a million times. Gain, pleasure, fame, and praise. That's
what we want. Well, we want to avoid loss, pain, obscurity, and blame. So basically,
we want to be the center of the universe that everyone recognizes is the most special feature
of everything. I mean, really, it's kind of so to say it in a way is really kind of ridiculous.
But isn't that what we do? I mean, and to some degree, it's not bad. If I have this
tea, then I what do I want? I want to have the tea. I want the taste and maybe the little
kind of like spark of like waking up. And that's all if it's I mean, it doesn't have to be
selfish. But if I'm doing it with a motivation of wanting to get something, I look at an
object like tea, and my mind's like, I'm not quite there yet. What this tea will make me
actually be better, brighter, happier, more awake. This is called conditioned existence.
Because if all of a sudden, the tea makes me choke, or I dropped the cup, and there's
no tea, or there's any things that could happen with this so many things that it could lead
to actual suffering, and at the very least, it wants to tease out, then I don't have the
support to actually have my mind be happy. Because I'm depending on this external thing
to have a sense of happiness, contentment. So basically, instead of recognizing the state
of my mind, in a way where it's naturally self satisfied or content, I'm looking outside
of my mind, and relying on things around to make me happy. And then a lot of stuff out
there doesn't make me happy, it actually makes me unhappy. And so I try to avoid it. So anytime
we're in this kind of a framework, it's called the eight worldly concerns.
So Buddhism's hardcore. We're trying to come out of orienting around that, where I'm trying
to have the world make me happy, and I'm trying to avoid the parts of the world that make
me not happy. Right? So that's basically operating in a kind of a way of holding my mind in the
eight worldly concerns. So it comes down to hope and fear. And to finally come out of
hope and fear, how do we do that? All these teachings talk about look at how things are.
Look really closely at how things work. How do things outside work? How does the mind
work? If we really look closely with logic, with our own intelligence, and are really
thorough way and keep that investigation open, we'll actually have a more accurate experience
of what's happening. We'll be more attuned to cause, condition, and effect. That's why
they say this in some ways is just a scientific analysis, Buddhism. But it actually is a scientific
analysis also of the mind. So it's this meditation. And if we map that mind, it can be considered
a philosophy. And if we apply that in our daily life, it can be considered a way of life,
a transformative practice, a path. So how do we do that analysis to come out of these
eight worldly concerns, which are pervasive? Anytime if you ever think I'm out of the eight
worldly concerns, well, first off, you thought that, so you're not. Because that thought
is actually indicating grasping. They say Buddhas don't think. So if we have a think,
if we have a thought, and we reaffirm the thought, then we're a sentient being. So that's
a good check right off the bat. We're not out of the eight worldly concerns just yet.
So in this progressive stages of meditation on emptiness by Kenpo Sultrum Jamsa Rinpoche,
he's talking about this analysis. How do we look closely? So we come out of the eight
worldly concerns. So we can recognize how our mind is already pure and perfect, right?
And that's the basic basis of Tantra, of doing a nundra practice. This is kind of what we're
assuming we're doing when we do a nundra practice. Taking this kind of view that the empty, clear
nature of my mind is expressing itself as the mandala of the refuge tree, for example.
So Kenpo Sultrum Jamsa Rinpoche says, page 22 in this book, "At the end of our analysis,
we'll arrive at the conclusion that the self is simply a vague and convenient concept that
we project now here and now there onto a stream of experiences and is nothing in and of itself.
One may wish to maintain that sense of self, that it's the continuity of a stream of physical
and mental events that constitute a personality, and that as such it does not have to have
the characteristics of being a lasting single and independent entity. But this is simply
a redefinition of the term self. It does not explain our emotional behavior at all. Buddhism
is not telling anyone that he should believe that he has a self or that he does not have
a self. It is saying that when one looks at the way one suffers and the way one thinks
and responds emotionally to life, it is as if one believed that there were a self that
was lasting, single, and independent. And yet on closer analysis, no such self can be isolated
or found. In other words, the skandhas are empty of a self. This felt sense of me, even
if I don't believe I'm a lasting, independent, permanent me, I still feel like I am. This
is a deeper layer of habitual mind or orientation than propositional beliefs. This is like a
way I fundamentally orient every single kind of moment of experience, this felt sense of
me. Buddhism calls that self. So how do I come out of that? Because if as long as I have
that felt sense of me, then it operates with the eight worldly concerns, hope and fear.
This is in one way like a little bit of a talk for artists because like, oh, you know,
I'm expressing myself, right? Buddhism says good art is when you don't express yourself,
not from this fundamental fixated sense of me. Good art comes when we express ourselves
not oriented in that way. And then it becomes actually wisdom art, wisdom expression, creative
outreaching display of enlightened activity, which actually isn't just a nice piece of
art. It's actually like an artful way of living that anyone who ever interacts with it is
automatically uplifted towards a more easy situation for them to realize their own natural
condition of mind, which is pure and perfect. So here in this book, advice from a spiritual
friend, a commentary on Nagarjuna's letter to a friend, again, by Kempis and Don Armitje,
he talks on page 208 about egolessness. And he says with its understanding, let's take
a deeper look at egolessness. The state of egolessness is the absolute meaning. On the
relative level, we have the sense of I. And no matter whether it really exists or not,
our mundane experience involves clinging and holding strongly to this notion of a self.
As a result, we end up doing many unwholesome things that did not benefit anyone. This happens
because of grasping onto ego, attaching to the notion of a self. We're trying to get
smarter about this. The teaching explains that there is no truly existent ego entity.
What is the ego? It is a conception, one of our many thoughts. We grasp hundreds of notions
every day and the ego is one of them. Clinging and identifying with an ego distorts our reasoning
and understanding of what is happening and what we're doing. Activities influenced by
ego are often based on self-importance. This leads to numerous troubles and difficulties.
In reality, there's no ego, no self, no duality, and no grasping. Whether we look among the
aggregates or apart from them, it gradually becomes clear that there is no self to be
found anywhere at all. The teaching explains this clearly, and when you realize it for
yourself and the state of direct perception, it is known as vipassana, or clear seeing,
because it is the truth. This is not imaginary, but the truth. Ooh, imaginative play, right?
There's no solid core to anything, no permanent object in this samsaric world. Nothing exists
in the way it usually appears, separate and differentiated. Appearances are like a hallucination.
In the same way, the ego is an illusion. To see this exactly as it is is known as supreme
seeing. That is a great insight and the meaning of vipassana. If we're undiluted, phenomena
appear exactly as they are. Things are neither ignored nor exaggerated, neither overstated
nor understated, but just so. To keep up and deepen this meditation is the essential discipline.
Once you take up the practice, continue until full realization. I'm jumping around, but
this is all on a thread, right, if you like. So uprooting ego clinging. We're trying to
say, okay, if we're not operating around the eight worldly concerns, that means we have
to recognize how we're holding onto a sense of me, a distorted perception of a fixated
sense of self. And how do we undo that fixated sense of self? If we're going to allow for
our creative natural impulse, the wisdom, compassionate, outreaching quality of mind,
if we're going to allow for it to display naturally, how do we do that? So that's where
we're at. We're kind of locating this ego and then we're kind of going into a few instructions
about how to actually dissolve that unrealistic fixation. So here in uprooting clinging, commentary
on Mipham Rinpoche's wheel of analytic meditation by both Venerable Kempa Rinpoche's. Here it's
on page 58. This is talking about these aggregates, form, feeling, perception, mental formation,
consciousness. They say all of phenomena, outer and inner, are one of these aggregates
to their combination. Each aggregate appears like the reflection of the moon and water,
a mirage or a banana tree. In each case, there's no essence, no solid existence. They're all
based on impermanence. They exist in a momentary and changeable state. This investigation leads
us to the conclusion, the world of experience is an illusion. And since this world is an
illusion, there's no need to be attached. Attachment and clinging are foolish, unnecessary
and unwise. If the world consists of nothing but the five aggregates and they have no more
reality than a reflection of the moon and water or a mirage, then all attachment must
also be based on illusion. Maintaining awareness of this is the practice of meditation.
The result of a thorough and focused investigation is the development of definitive understanding.
The perfect understanding we gain through the use of this mental analysis isn't something
we need to believe in. This awareness is certainty wisdom. When we meditate in this way, use
using this analytic meditation, old habitual patterns will continually activate clinging
and attachment. But if we maintain the meditation, we'll clearly see that even birth and death
are illusions. Birth and death are just habitual patterns. The continued application of this
analytic meditation will eventually lead us to discover the transcendental wisdom rainbow
body that is beyond habitual patterns. In the Zogchen teachings, there are many stories
of how great masters developed such an elevated realization of the transparency of reality
based on the realization of the empty illusory nature of everything. That they could even
move through material objects. They could do this because they had actualized the true
nature and thoroughly realized how apparent reality is constructed. The Tibetan phrase
for relative truth of how things appear is kunzop dempa or samvritti satcha in Sanskrit.
The literal translation of this is the truth that is completely superficial, artificial,
or unreal. The truth that is completely superficial, artificial, or unreal. The process of
investigating
using this technique of analytic meditation is so important because it establishes a foundation
upon which there can be proper development. Without it, even if it appears that we are
progressing, there will be difficulty later. Any progress made without this foundation
will eventually collapse. The definitive understanding or the view established by analytic
meditation
is to not be attached to any aspect of reality. Arriving at this state of awareness that is
beyond attachment causes us to perceive everything as being in transit, moving, changing, and
only manifesting on a temporary basis. From this point of view, it becomes clear that
clinging and attachment inevitably bring suffering. It also becomes clear that when we no longer
have attachment, anger will not develop in us. This is one of the principal understandings
of Mahayana Buddhism. Renunciation doesn't mean being completely removed from the world.
It simply means being detached. The Buddha left his royal palace to go to the jungle
and meditate. That is one form of renunciation. But the more profound meaning of renunciation
is having non-attachment that avoids clinging to worldly activities. Having no attachments
is a much deeper form of renunciation than simply separating ourselves from objects of
attachment. The whole idea or focus of renunciation is to attain a clear understanding of the
state of non-attachment. When we have no attachment to worldly activities, the ideal of ren
unciation
is realized. Then we can find enjoyment in every experience. This is what imaginative
play is in Buddhism. When we have no attachment to worldly activities, the ideal of renunciation
is realized. Then we can find enjoyment in every experience. This is saying that samsara
actually isn't a pit of vipers or a deer trapped in the woods that have a ring of fire surrounded
on all sides where we're just waiting for the fire to come to us. It's actually perfect.
Samsara is a function of grasping onto a fixated sense of self that's not actually there. That's
kind of what all these Sutra Mahayana teachings are kind of orienting us towards. How to actually
dissolve this fixation. That just means how to have non-attachment with the experience
we have, meaning how to not funnel our experience through a sense of ego with me. Then we can
access that creative imaginative play of how experience happens when it's not funneled
through a fixated sense of me. How is that? What's that experience like? That would be
what I would call imaginative play beyond the eight worldly concerns. This book, I just
kind of came across recently, it's not that new. Powerful transformation. The alchemy
of the secret heart essence. This is a compilation of teachings. Padmasambhava, Chudralingpa,
Kabjit, Durga Kentsa Rinpoche, and Tukur Urjan Rinpoche and others. This is now we're going
into what's it like to not fixate through egoic meanness. In this page seven, the
most considerable of all obstacles are the innermost ones, which involve fixating on
perceiver and perceived. Basically this refers to our habit of dualistic experience, which
is caused by a lack of stability in the original basic state of empty cognizance. When this
empty cognizance is not stable in itself, its expression is to reach out and fixate
on the five objects of experience, the five sense objects. They are the perceived. The
perceiver is the mind that fixates upon them. Although this basic original state of self-existing
wakefulness has no duality whatsoever, because we fixate on experiences as being something
other, seemingly duality takes place. As it continues, this perpetuation of dualistic
experience is exactly what characterizes the minds of all sentient beings. Perceived and
perceiver. The minds of sentient beings are caught up and fixating on perceiver and perceived.
This is the very core of samsaric experience, and this is in itself our innermost obstacle.
Okay, so here we get into the Vajrayana component. So what's it like to not operate through perce
iver
and perceived? This is kind of where we're kind of headed, and it's what the nundra practice
actually assumes. I'm going to pause on this book. Great. So where this opens us up into
is the three samadhis. So this is a teaching the Venerable Kemper Rinpoche's have taught
on so many times. In this book of theirs, Essential Journey of Life and Death, Volume
1, Indestructible Nature of Body, Speech, and Mind, they have a really wonderful explanation
of the three samadhis. And it's also talked about by Togo Urjan Rinpoche in this book,
Powerful Transformation. And in so many of these books, the three samadhis. So this is
actually how we orient every single visualization practice, so creation stage practice, or
imagination
stage practice. This is how we orient that in Tantra Mahayana, so in Vajrayana, our Tibetan
Buddhism. So always they go through the three samadhis. So just to say them quickly, the
first samadhi is the true nature samadhi. The second samadhi is the all arising or all
illumination samadhi. And the third is the seed syllable samadhi, or the causal samadhi.
So to put this really simply, the first samadhi, or concentration, this way our mind is aware.
The first samadhi, the true nature samadhi, is having the mind know itself in a way that
doesn't fixate on an egoic sense of me. It's just fresh and natural. So the true nature
samadhi is recognizing the emptiness nature of mind. So this is what all these instructions
said we need to do, to experience life with non-attachment, to see it as illusion, as
a hallucination, as magic. It's impermanent. It's pointing out that we see the external
world like that, and we look at the perceiver in that way too. It's just like an illusion,
magic show, hallucination, this ongoing experience of transitory, kind of like bubbling up, or
like movement of mind. So true nature samadhi is seeing that flexible open quality of mind
that's doing that. Buddhism typically calls that emptiness. That's the true nature samadhi.
So that's step one. As the beginning of any visualization practice, we're trying to have
our mind rest in its nature, open, flexible, and allowing for the impermanent nature of
everything, outer and inner, perceiver and perceived, to flexibly, impermanently display
as they will. Then this goes into the second samadhi, naturally. It's just typically in
Sutra Mahayana called compassion. Here it's called the all arising samadhi, or all illuminating,
or all illumination samadhi. This is when our mind is open and relaxed, it naturally
has a cognizant quality. There's a knowing quality. There's an energetic quality. This
aware awareness always happens. The mind is always open and aware. They're inseparable.
But here this specific samadhi is called compassion without focus, all arising. The natural way
the mind is when it doesn't hold itself around a fixed sense of me and mine, is it's totally
open without boundary or limit, and it naturally arises as knowing quality, as wisdom. This
is referred to sometimes as clarity. So compassion without focus means it's compassion that it
doesn't arise in response to something, so it's not conditioned compassion. It's a natural
quality of compassionate intelligence or cognizance. It includes knowledge. It includes knowing.
This is called compassion without focus, or all arising samadhi. And so then when this
knowing or this awareness crystallizes itself, it's called the seed syllable samadhi, or
the causal samadhi. So here's when we get into a sense of causation or things interacting.
Because in seed syllable samadhi, this arises as a syllable. This, I'm talking about, is
my mind. So it's just total open emptiness awareness naturally includes all experience
with great like inclusivity or like cognizant kind of boundless cognizance knowing. And
then that kind of in one way gathers itself into a more solid tangible form, which is
still on the semi form, and it's called seed syllable. And it's this crystallized distill
that Rinpoche's call it like a nuclear kind of like inner nucleus of awareness. And in
Tibetan Buddhism, this is called lungsem, wind and mind or wisdom wind and mind. This
is empty emptiness and compassion in union inseparably. And they say this is actually
the indestructible nature of body, speech and mind, the subtitle of this book, essential
journey of life and debt. Union of emptiness and compassion indivisibly arises in a very
crystallized essential nuclear power form as a seed syllable. This is actually what's
in the heart center of every yidam or deity when we're doing a visualization practice.
They say it's actually what's in our heart center right now. This union of wisdom wind
and mind is always there. When we're alive, when we're dying, when we're dead, when we're
after dead, when we become when we've realized in some new body, it's always a wisdom wind
with awareness with mind. Always. That's what Tantra is pointing to. And it's called Tantra
argue continuity, what's continuous wisdom wind, inseparably united with awareness, arigpa.
This is indestructible. It's always there, but it's empty. So it's not a thing. It's
not a self. This is the basis that this is how imaginative display, this is the source
of imaginative play in Tibetan Buddhism, all Tantra. So with Sutra Mahayana, we established
the emptiness nature in Shen Tong or fourth turning, that we established the creative
outreaching capacity of like brilliance called Buddha nature. These are inseparably joined
wisdom and compassion or wisdom and skillful means or emptiness and clarity. This is called
Tantra. Now we're in Yana for Yana for create, so Yana 456789. This is all inner Tantras.
So now we're talking about imaginative play beyond eight worldly concerns. Okay, so that's
kind of where we are here. And these three samadhi's are the distilled. This is the doorway
into Tantra. This is the beginning of every Tantric practice, true nature, samadhi, emptiness,
all arising samadhi boundless compassion, distills into a tangible form, a heart essence, seed
syllable samadhi, which arises as cause and effect in the sense of things interacting.
Are they things interacting? No, because there are no entities. Everything's emptiness. This
has already been established. We're in a state of mind that doesn't hold on to things as
if they are our things, just rainbow display. But from the seed syllable, that then expands
into a deity of being with a shape and form and it has a hand objects and colors and ornaments
and then retinue doing dazzling displays. This is called imaginative play beyond the
eight worldly concerns. This is what Tantra is pointing towards in the Buddhist sense.
Function of emptiness and compassion. So is it possible to be an artist and an artist
with no sense of me? Buddhism says this is the only way to be a true artist. Everything
else is just an ego trip. Everything else is just a show. It's just eight worldly concerns.
Look at me. Praise. I'm just trying to get what I want. I'm hoping to get what I want.
I'm fearing to get what I don't want. This is just samsara. It's just another way to
do samsara of the infinite ways to do samsara. We can do it as an artist, a booker, a baker,
a candlestick maker. It doesn't matter. It's just about me. It's just an endless me game
that leads to endless suffering. The way out in a Tantra approach is to use something like
a technique of these three samadhis and then we have the creative, we have the capacity
to have this really dazzling burst of all powerful wisdom display that's totally outreaching
with compassionate energy to support and uplift every single being with fine-tuned nuance
according to how do we co-create artistic moments of mind together. This is called Tantra in
Tibetan Buddhism and it always goes through a sadhana practice. There's always this lineage
structure that because I'm a little baby, I can't use high-powered Tantra techniques
as if I know how to use them. I'm just like learning basics, really basics, but these
basics are just so powerful like the three samadhis. They'll do everything. They'll bring
up all these habitual ways that I've been grasping onto a sense of me and all these
games I've been playing that have led me to so much suffering and caused so much trouble
for other beings. They'll reveal these habits and then if I use this imaginative play within
a sadhana context and then use my body, speech, and mind, these ritual kind of enhancements,
I can release giant iceberg chunks of all these distorted perception and mistaken ideas
and very quickly and finally be like a really true artist where like everything is like
artistic display that boosts everyone, not just all about me, all about all of us. And
that's where Tantra is like a living system of skillful means art. And so we've jumped
around and there's certain things I kind of wanted to say. So these three samadhis, these
are things we really need to know because they're actually what we're trying to do with
every nundra practice, every Tibetan Buddhist practice, these three samadhis. Emptiness arises
as compassion without reaching unlimited kind of like tangible shape which is called seed
syllable samadhi and then does these enlightened expressions. And then how does it communicate
through light? In this context everything is seen as wisdom. So in the sutra context
they say it's like a rainbow. In the tantra context they say everything is transcendental
wisdom rainbow display. Sound is, speech is, speech sound is, form shape is, mind movement
is all rainbow display, transcendental wisdom rainbow body, all of it. So this is an imaginative
display not funneled through egoic mehood. And so we can talk about this, we can talk
about these things as if these three qualities of mind, the Buddha taught was so kind, presented
this in so many ways depending on what would help beings. We can talk about this as substance
like seed syllable, sometimes like the ground of all being or Buddha nature. Like this nature
is talked about as an object even though it's empty of being an entity. You can talk about
this nature as if it's a quality. This is like wrong tongue, empty of self. It has the
quality of being inherent as like empty of inherent existence, free of entityhood, free
of identity, free of fixed characteristic, free of fixed destination, free of fixed source,
free of fixed place of location of abiding. It's free of all these things, these are qualities
it has. Emptiness. And then thirdly is talk about it as a state of mind. Union of compassion
and emptiness, of skillful means and wisdom. This is called Rigpa, true nature of mind,
naturalness, sometimes it's called wisdom or Rangjhanyesh, self-born wisdom awareness.
Unborn, unceasing by nature like the sky, experienced by self-reflexive awareness, discerning
pristine cognition, discerning pristine cognition. Rangric, this is the wisdom awareness, the
union of emptiness and clarity in self-born awareness. It always has this energetic display.
This is the union of emptiness and clarity. This is called Lungsam or wisdom awareness,
always riding a subtle wind. This is the indestructible nature of mind. And if we connect to this
again
and again in our practice, this is actually what will make us accelerate this whole path
of being free of samsara, of the states of mind that make everything about me, that's
eight worldly concerns that basically make everyone have to meet me on my terms all the
time, where I use everyone just for my advantage. This is really the fundamental way to undo
this really quickly, to do this three nature like the three samadhis, recognize emptiness
and its clarity, knowing capacity in union as the display of all experience as the transcendent
wisdom rainbow body. So when we visualize a refuge tree and under practice and ourselves
and doing these mudras and making these offerings and doing this, we're trying to always maintain
the state of transcendent wisdom rainbow body. That perceived is transcendent wisdom rainbow
body. The perceiver is transcendent wisdom rainbow body. Transcendental meaning is emptiness.
Rainbow body meaning it's like it actually arises as like a display, as an empty appearance.
Play is in union, so it's emptiness and clarity in union. So then this becomes imaginative
play and then the playfulness is actually we have to tune in and line up with where
other beings are at and what's skillful to help encourage them to relax and like have
their own creative flow come out. Then we can co-create, co-shape, co-play, do like have
all that sort of kind of all these wisdom mandalas are all about and that becomes like
the way of the bodhisattva. It's kind of what all this is really talking about. So here
back to this book and then I'll conclude this powerful transformations. Read again from
Togor Urjan Rinpoche about these three samadhis. Sadhana is not something we make up. There's
actually no real difference between our Buddha nature and the state of Dharmakaya of all
the Buddhas. So rather than this practice being a way of creating an imagination of
the state of a Buddha, we don't have to create anything. We should allow our nature to be
what it actually is, which is no different from that of all the Buddhas. Just read the
sadhana's lines while leaving the mind in its natural state and the three samadhis naturally
occur. Just read the sadhana's lines while leaving the mind in its natural state and
the three samadhis naturally occur. And then back here, page 13, the importance of this
yidam practice or this visualization stage practice in Tantra Mahayana. Yidam practice
has great benefit. Mipham Rinpoche had a vision of Manjushri, his supreme deity, and through
that he became a great pandita, an extremely learned scholar. Many of the Indian mahasiddhas
practiced Tara sadhana. They combined recognizing mind essence with a yidam practice and attained
accomplishment. All the life stories of those who became great masters tell of yidam practice.
You never hear of anyone saying, "I achieved accomplishment and didn't use any deity."
I didn't need to say any mantra. The yidam practice is like adding oil to the fire of
practice. It blazes up even higher and hotter. Visualization stage practice is critically
important in Tibetan Buddhists as a skillful means to awaken our wisdom awareness. And
then last here, this is like simple way to kind of go about this. Page eight, if you
train in just one deity, like Vajrakalaya, practicing at first within the structure of
the three samadhis, and then while recognizing mind essence, I can guarantee that within
this one lifetime, you can accomplish both the common and supreme cities, the supreme
city of complete enlightenment. And here he makes it even simpler. Page nine, practice
in a simple way like this. First, remind yourself of being the deity, thinking, for example,
I am Vajrakalaya. Then recite the mantra of Vajrakalaya or whatever mantra you're doing.
Or simply say, "Omahung," this whatever mantra you're doing. Next, recognizing that the one
who has, sorry, next, recognizing that the one who imagines the deity, enchants the mantra
is none other than your own mind. That's it. Have conviction that I am the deity. And while
you sustain that conviction, the certainty wisdom, recite the mantra of that deity. And
then while you recite the mantra of the deity, with certainty wisdom that you are the deity,
realize that everything is your mind. This is called deity, mantra, and Dharmakaya. These
are the three samadhis. Deity is the seed syllable samadhi. Then the outreaching expansive capacity
of mind, that's actually called wisdom, speech, or mantra. And then the Dharmakaya, that's
the true nature samadhi. So this is the union of the three caiyas. I am the deity, recite
the mantra. This is all my mind. This is simply put, transcendental wisdom rainbow body, everything
.
So page nine, in this way, using the single thought, I am the deity, visualization takes
no more than an instant. This instantaneous recollection, bringing the deity vividly to
mind in an instant, is the highest and best form of visualization. With your voice chant
the mantra and with your mind recognize. It is perfectly all right to decide that this
type of practice is sufficient and all inclusive. It's not like we have to please the wisdom
deity, which has no thoughts anyway. Wisdom deities don't get pleased or displeased. So
it is really more a matter of making up your own mind and practicing in this simple all
inclusive way. This is my opinion. Maybe I'm being too simple here. On the other hand, maybe
it is true, it's all pure gold. So thank you, I thought to bring it to a simple point at
the end. In the end, we can think, imagine it play and all this boundless beings and
how do I kind of attune to them like naturally with actual like accuracy, then if we really
in our own practice as we're as we're developing this capacity, have that vajra courage, I
am the deity. Recite the mantra as the natural expression of the nature, self resounding mantra,
and then recognize this is all mind, outside's mind, inside's mind, perceived as mind, perceivers
mind, it's all mind, it's all the deity. And just let yourself be the deity. And this is
the deity's mandala. And this is the mantra energy, the movement of the mandala. And just
allow it to be there and at the conclusion of the sadhana, following exactly how to create
the sadhana and how to dissolve the sadhana, exactly according to the lineage instructions,
allow it to dissolve. And then these samadhis all dissolve back into the true nature of samadhi.
And then everything is revealed as like a beautiful artistic, imaginative display of
creative transcendental wisdom rainbow body, and its emptiness and its outreaching clarity
capacity and their natural union, wisdom and compassion inseparable. So that's kind of
a brief talk today. And then we'll go on to the duejum terra sarnundra practice. So we'll
begin here, this duejum terra sarnundra practice thing is page 17, with the spontaneous calling
the Lama from afar by his Holiness duejum Rinpoche. So I hope this was helpful. If I'm
saying anything wrong or doing something, any mistakes, I really apologize for them.
But really just I'm trying to repeat these words of these great masters and kind of also
offer some resources that if you if any of this is curious for you, or you're like want
to look further, then these resources are all available to us. And then in addition,
we have these practices we can just do in a really simple distilled way, which Venerable
Kimper Rinpoche is just like Raga Asi, just like Mipham Rinpoche, they can take this infinite
complex, utterly profound and vast Buddha Dharma and distill it into these essential
practiceable like very pithy instructions that we can really taste the benefit in our
direct experience with very little time or effort. So here we have this great fortune,
the duejum terra sarnundra is a perfect example of this, a term of revelation by his Holiness
duejum Rinpoche. It's exactly like that. It includes all of the Buddha Dharma in a very
simple, concise, easy to practice way. So we're utterly fortunate beings in this time.
And we need to really use that fortune, because not everyone has this fortune. And people
need us. And we need to show up for them. And I need to show up for me too. This world's
not getting any like more, you know, nice and kind and common sense and really intelligent.
It's kind of like this is getting really tangible time, a lot of tangible like warring tangible
backlash against things. So many of these elements are getting so distorted, just like
echo chambers of distorted, very tangible, gross level, kind of like five degenerate
five qualities of degeneration age. This is a time before is worse. To really recognize
that inherent goodness of oneself and others. We can take time set these times aside for
ourselves and get more of a confidence in this. At the very least, even though we can't
do some big outreaching thing, when our elements are dissolving and we're dying, we can recognize
this nature with confidence and we can have this compassion to come out just like so easily
and just love beings and just love like there's no really big difference between outer and
inner perceiver and perceived can just be love, be compassion, wisdom, like be transcendental
wisdom, rainbow body. This time's coming for us. This time is really coming. Tick tock,
tick tock. I mean, I'm this gray is like getting grayer, you know, by the minute. When the
time comes, like I want to try to have confidence in this. If we can if we can recognize the
meaning of these teachings right now, it's a perfect opportunity that when we die and
all these elements break up and it's just right in front of us, this nature of our mind
will be full on vibrant display of sound, color, light, like all this and the deity is
everything. It'll be brilliantly like just like immaculately like display. If we can
relax and be like, this is I am deity. This is deity. Have compassion. This is just the
arising movement of the nature. It's all my mind. We will go to Dehwa Chan. The Buddha
is so strong on this. Lama Chime Rinpoche is so strong on this. Kemper Rinpoche is so
strong on this. So this is really what we're practicing. We're not just like trying to
be good Buddhists or something. We're trying to get free, recognize this is all perfect
and pure and this is how to do it with these practices. And so that's kind of my like little
kind of obsessive ranting kind of conviction that I'm just telling myself, Drakpa, get
your shit together, Drakpa. It's easy to say this stuff, but we really actually have to
get that conviction. Then if someone says a nice thing, it's a rainbow. If someone says
a mean thing, rainbow. We get sick, rainbow. We win the lottery, rainbow, you know, like
we become indestructible wisdom nature. Then anyone we engage with, we're just naturally
going to love them in a skillful way. Then everyone, when they say the Buddha was a friend
to everyone, we'll become that. We will truly be a friend to every single being forever.
Then we'll really be fulfilling our bodhisattva vow. So really thank you so much. We'll go
to this page 18. The prayer of calling Lama from afar by his home is Dehwa Rinpoche. Really
thank you all very much. Thank you. Thank you. Quick summary. It's good. It's a quick summary.
We covered a lot. So imagine it of play of the eight going, imagine it of play beyond
the eight worldly concerns. This all basically comes down to fearlessness. How to fearlessly
like creatively engage with experience in a way that really loves beings and really compassionately
responds to them and works with them and encourages them. And that means encourages me and responds
to me and works with me. Like, like fearlessness. That's really what this is coming down to.
It's like a key essential point of Tibetan Buddhism or Vajrayana path. That courage,
I am the deity. This is good. This is pure. Everything is enlightened wisdom awareness.
And it's easy to say transcendental wisdom rainbow body. It's so easy to say that. But
to recognize that now and an hour from now and a day from now and a week from now and
when real challenges happen, that's really when we get to see for ourselves like how
much we're really absorbed the teachings into our hearts. And so here is a quick Dzogchen
deity practice. Meeting your true nature. So beautiful. There's another compilation
of books. This took her urgent Rinpoche once again here. It says talking about after we
die, right? Big challenging time, right? The sounds in the Bardo, so this is after we die,
the sounds in the Bardo are not small noises. They roar like a hundred thousand simultaneous
thunderclaps and the lights and colors shine with the brilliance of 100,000 suns. Later
when the deities begin to appear the largest of the size of Mount Sumeru while the smallest
are no bigger than a mustard seed. The deities are vibrantly alive and dance about faced
with this spectacle. You have two options. Either you panic with fright or you recognize
them as your natural displays. This is why it is incredibly beneficial to practice in
this life. So you grow familiar with your own natural displays. Otherwise facing them
in the Bardo will result in deep confusion and bewilderment. Fearlessness. So then Rinpoche
is an essential journey of life and death. Again, they just emphasize this same point
in a different way in the Vajrayana. This is 306 in the Vajrayana teachings. It often
says that in order to do visualization practice, we need to have courage and fearlessness.
It's a big job to fully embrace this beautiful special view that has never arisen in our
heart or mind before. This view will completely smash our ego. Therefore we need courage.
We need fearlessness. These are so important. If you have fearless courage together with
skillful means and wisdom, you will conquer the world. In this case, we're conquering
all of our habitual patterns and the negative emotions that are like hidden tigers such
as anger, jealousy and hatred. They're very aggressive, hiding behind the scenes, showing
up at any moment to attack us and others. To defeat and overcome these negative emotions,
we need courage and fearlessness. That's why the Buddha is named Conqueror. The Buddha
is not the kind of Conqueror who attacks, destroying cities and murdering people. The
Buddha as well as all the Bodhisattvas in our hearts totally conquered negative emotions
and habitual patterns. They're not creating more suffering. They create everlasting joy,
peace and happiness for all beings. They're true conquerors, true warriors. Now we're
following in their footsteps, sitting on their thrones. In order to embrace this view, we
need courage, confidence and fearlessness. So this is imaginative play beyond the eight
worldly concerns. This is like what it means to be an artist in the Tibetan Buddhist sense.
And this view is exceptionally specific. This is not just some easy transcendental wisdom
rainbow body. We just say that. We can get to the heart of it with the key essential
points like Turkar Arjuna, which I said, and the deity recite the mantra, recognize this
is all display of my mind. This is interesting. I really wanted to mention this today, which
is unusual and interesting. In this book, entering the way of the great vehicle, Zogchen as the
culmination of the Mahayana. This is by Rongzompa Chukizongpo. This is the great Rongzompa. This
is one of the two pillars, one of the two omniscient ones in the Nyingma school of Buddhism, Longch
ampa
and Rongzompa. This book, when this became translated, Kempo Saewandani Rinpoche said,
"Please get that and sell that in the Chisodarma store." Entering the way of the great vehicle.
This is one of the few texts by Rongzompa that survived. Rongzompa. So that's that. This is
about how this fearlessness is not just some wishy washy fearlessness. Page 108, Rongzompa.
This is the great perfection as intimate advice. How is an object resolved through intimate
advice? When resolved decisively, the significance of the object is recognized in connection with
several points. All phenomena are resolved to be empty and selfless. Without inherent
nature, absent of production, qualitatively the same, and nondual. On occasion, the meaning
of these terms may overlap and at times they indicate that there are verbal points made
precisely in accord with the terms that are used to express them. So this is a really
technical book. This is talking about the Zogchen view, what Zogchen means by transcendental
wisdom rainbow body. Resolved to be empty and selfless without inherent nature, absent of
production, qualitatively the same, and nondual. This is like a road map of all the philosophical
teachings of the Buddha right there in that one line. This is exceptionally specific. This
is how we get to transcendental wisdom rainbow body. Shravaka view resolves that everything's
empty and selfless, but they still think there's inherent nature of objects. Mind only school
sees that everything is selfless and empty and that all phenomena, the two emptinesses,
all phenomena outside and inside, perceiver and perceived, are empty of inherent nature,
but they still posit causation. They call it dependent origination, dependent arising.
That's a second nature in mind only school. Then Sutra Mahayana and Madhyamaka, the middle
way, they refute that there's no cause, there's no effect, there's no samsara, there's no
nirvana. They refute. They say it's absent of any production, no cause and effect on
the absolute view, but they do assert there is a correct relative truth. Then comes Tantra.
Tantra refutes that there's a correct relative truth because they say it's all pure, not
just one. There's not correct and incorrect anymore. They say it's all pure, but they
still rely on certain techniques of ascetic practice in the outer Tantras to establish
that purity. Then in Dzogchen, in the inner Tantras, they say it's all non-dual. They
don't have any techniques they use. They call it a path of non-progression path, effortless.
In this way, the Dzogchen view, what they mean, transcendental wisdom rainbow body,
is resolved to be empty and selfless, without inherent nature, absent of production, qualitatively
the same and non-dual. That's what we mean by Dzogchen, transcendental wisdom rainbow
body, which is what we can achieve if we just do these three simple points. I am the deity,
recite the mantra, recognizes all mind, display of mind, and then this, when the bardo comes
or when really challenging times come, that fearlessness will be there. We'll have that
courage through these very specific ways, put in really pithy, actionable statements
that we can really use right now, then we'll actually achieve that accomplishment. In the
next life, we'll become really courageous heroes for the benefit of every single being
we ever come in contact with from that point on forever. I pray that this happens for all
of us right away. Thank you, thank you friends, thank you.